---
layout: post
title: "Launch OpenBSD vmd Guests on Demand from SSH"
category: featured
tags: [OpenBSD, SSH, Virtualization]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

I was annoyed that <label
for="sn-electron" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">Electron apps</label>
<input id="sn-electron" class="margin-toggle" type="checkbox">
don't run on my OpenBSD laptop so I decided to run them inside a virtual
machine. Unfortunately, this laptop is underpowered by 2023 standards
& persistent Linux virtual machines would be competing with all the other
memory <label
for="sn-hogs" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">hogs</label>.
<input id="sn-hogs" class="margin-toggle" type="checkbox">
<span class="sidenote">
Other people are annoyed that Signal doesn't exist and <a
 href="https://icyphox.sh/blog/signal-vmm/">wrote helpful writeups</a>.
</span><span class="sidenote">
<small><a href="https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/tools/gopls">gopls</a></small>
</span>

I'd been kicking around the idea of using an ssh `ProxyCommand` to launch
transient EC2 instances connected to long-lived EBS volumes so I figured --
why not implement this for `vmd` hosts? I could forward Linux X11 apps to my
desktop & be able to use Signal<label
for="sn-hogs2" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label>.
<input id="sn-hogs2" class="margin-toggle" type="checkbox">
<span class="sidenote">
But not Visual Studio Code; there is no way that is usable with 4GB of memory.
I tried!
</span>

## How does this work? 

OpenSSH has the concept of session multiplexing] over a single connection.
By wrapping the master connection with a `ProxyCommand`, I tie the master
connection to the lifetime of the virtual machine. When it starts, the VM
starts; when it exits the VM exits.

`vmctl-ssh-wrapper.sh`, when invoked by OpenSSH, parses the output of
[`vmctl`](https://man.openbsd.org/vmctl) to determine if the vm is already
running. If it isn't, we try to bring it up, and schedule it for eventual
shutdown -- we will not shutdown vms that were manually started.

We determine the guest's IP address by parsing the output of `ifconfig tap`
and looking for interfaces with a "description" field matching the name of
our requested virtual machine. By convention, the guest's DHCP-assigned ip
is immediately above the address assigned to the host's `tap` interface.

Once we have the IP, we poll until the guest's ssh server comes up. When it
does, the socket is connected to our ssh client. When the script exits, we
(may) invoke `vmctl` once again to schedule a shutdown.

## VM Setup
[`vmd`](https://man.openbsd.org/vmd) is the OpenBSD virtualization daemon.
There's plenty of tutorials on how to install Linux over the fake serial port,
including <a href="https://icyphox.sh/blog/signal-vmm/">the one I linked
earlier</a>.

A fresh wrinkle is that newer Linux kernels <label
for="sn-noboot" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">will not boot</label>.
<input id="sn-noboot" class="margin-toggle" type="checkbox">
<span class="sidenote">
 "<a href="https://marc.info/?l=openbsd-bugs&m=167932237609527&w=2">MMIO
 is unfinished in vmd(8)."</a>
 </span>
 So stick to an OS release known to be working, and don't blindly jump to the
 next major release.

[`/etc/vm.conf`](https://man.openbsd.org/vm.conf)
```
vm "ubuntu" {
    memory 2G 
#    boot device cdrom
    cdrom "/home/jon/vm/mini.iso"
    disk "/home/jon/vm/ubuntu.img"
    interfaces 1
    local interface tap
    owner jon
    disable

}
```

## SSH Client Configuration

I added a block to my ssh configuration so that requests to `ubuntu.vmctl.host`
are be serviced by the virtual machine defined as `ubuntu`. The
`ControlPersist` block allows a 10 minutes idle period (no active X or ssh
clients) before shutting down.

[`~/.ssh/config`](https://man.openbsd.org/ssh_config):
```
Host *.vmctl.host
  ProxyCommand ~/.skel/bin/vmctl-ssh-wrapper.sh %h %p
  ControlMaster auto
  ControlPersist 10m
  ForwardX11 yes
```

## Just Let Me Install It, Already!

[Source here](github.com/wizardishungry/vmctl-ssh-wrapper). This is my first
shell script in a while, so gentle feedback is welcome.

This [works pretty well for Signal](https://deskto.ps/u/wizardishungry/d/8eqfrb)! Who knows, maybe Slack or VSCode might even
be possible on a nicer laptop.
